.TH rtf2latex2e "March 11, 2012"
.SH NAME
rtf2latex2e \- convert RTF file to LaTeX format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B
rtf2latex2e
[options ...] file.tex
.SH DESCRIPTION
.I
rtf2latex2e
converts a text file in rich text format (RTF) to a text
file in LaTeX format.  Text styles, symbols, equations,
tables, and footnotes are handled.
.I
rtf2latex2e
also extracts and saves any image files found inside the RTF file.
The resulting LaTeX file and included images can be typeset using LaTeX
but, of course, image formats unsupported by LaTeX will need to
be converted to an image with a supported format.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-b
Single option that chooses options that for
the best match between LaTeX and RTF formatting.  (This fidelity
is at the expense of readability and often the RTF makes poor
choices for indentation and line spacing that are automatically
provided by LaTeX.)  This option is equivalent to \'-e 1 -p 63 -t 7 -T 3\'
.TP
.B \-D
Create a new directory named \'file-latex\' and save the converted
LaTeX and extracted images inside.
.TP
.B \-e #
Manage equation conversion.  Multiple options (see below) can be
combined by adding individual options together. For example, if you would like both the equations that have been
translated into TeX as well as the images of the equations
(because you don\'t trust
.I
rtf2latex2e
) then you might use \'-e 3\'
so that you could see both in the typeset LaTeX file.
.TP
.B \-e 1
Convert MathType equations (which includes basic
Word Equation Editor equations) to LaTeX
.TP
.B \-e 2
Include image of Math Type equations (which includes basic
Word Equation Editor equations) in the LaTeX file
.TP
.B \-e 4
Retain the intermediate .eqn files extracted for each equation.
This is primarily useful as a debugging tool.
.TP
.B \-e 8
Insert the name of the .eqn file into the text of the LaTeX file.
Obviously this is most useful when the previous option is selected as well.
.TP
.B \-f
Create a fractional LaTeX document.  The LaTeX preamble is omitted
and the resulting file can be processed using \\include{file.tex}
in another document.
.TP
.B \-h
Help!
.TP
.B \-n
Convenience option to produce a natural LaTeX document that is easy to edit.
This option discards a lot of paragraph mark-up and futzing with line
spacing.  Consequently the results will probably not look like the original
RTF file, but isn\'t that why you converted the file in the first
place?  This option is equivalent to \'-e 1 -p 33 -t 12 -T 0\'
.TP
.B \-p #
Manage paragraph conversion.  The number is additive
so if you want to preserve only indenting and line spacing
then use -p 6
.TP
.B \-p 1
Conversion of basic paragraph formatting to LaTeX structures.
For example, enable mapping of \'heading 1\' style to \'\\section{}\'
.TP
.B \-p 2
Retain paragraph indention of RTF document.
.TP
.B \-p 4
Retain spacing between paragraphs as in RTF document.
.TP
.B \-p 8
Retain paragraph line spacing of RTF document.
.TP
.B \-p 16
Retain margins used in RTF document.
.TP
.B \-p 32
Retain paragraph alignment (e.g., justified, left, right) in RTF document.
.TP
.B \-P path
path to support files (See FILES below).  The directory that the files
were originally installed is shown at the end of the help text
from @code{rtf2latex2e -h}
.TP
.B \-t #
Manage text conversion.  Combine options by adding them together.
Why isn\'t there a way to retain the actual fonts (e.g., Helvetica)?
Because that is hard.
.TP
.B \-t 1
Retain text size of RTF document.
.TP
.B \-t 2
Retain text colors in RTF document.
.TP
.B \-t 4
Retain text formatting (bold, italic) of RTF document.
.TP
.B \-t 8
Replace tabs with spaces (because tabs are useless in LaTeX).
.TP
.B \-T #
Manage table conversion.  Table conversion kind of works,
but the impedance mismatch between the way that RTF handles
tables and LaTeX does them is horrific.  Often it is
.TP
.B \-T 1
keep column widths
.TP
.B \-T 2
keep column alignment
.SH FILES
There are a bunch of other files used
by
.I
rtf2latex2e
These are usually located in /usr/local/share/rtf2latex2e
but may have been installed elsewhere by your packaging system.  The
files most amenable to tweaking by humans are
.nf
    latex-encoding   file used to map symbols to LaTeX commands
    r2l-head         LaTeX commands inserted in every LaTeX preamble
    r2l-map          mapping between RTF styles and LaTeX commands
    r2l-pref         default preferences for rtf2latex2e
.fi
The other files consist of tables to facilitate conversion of RTF commands
and symbols.
.SH EXAMPLE
.nf
rtf2latex2e foo              convert foo.rtf to foo.tex
rtf2latex2e -n foo           minimal excess mark-up
rtf2latex2e -e 15 foo        help identify failed equation conversion
rtf2latex2e foo-eqn003.eqn   debug third equation (after above command)
rtf2latex2e -D foo           put foo.tex and images in foo-latex
rtf2latex2e foo.rtfd         convert and put result in foo-latex
.fi
.SH BUGS
Some might consider RTF to be a bug.  Markup for table conversion is still
convoluted.  Good free utilities for converting PICT and EMF files to
EPS or PDF are not readily available for all platforms.
.SH AVAILABILITY
.I
rtf2latex2e
is GPL licensed and available from SourceForge at http://rtf2latex2e.sourceforge.net

